This project uses SQL to explore Bureau of Labor Statistics data and find trends in hiring across different occupations.

The analysis provides businesses with a way to increase the ROI of new hires. It outlines when employees in certain occupations should be hired according to the movements of the job market in past years. In this analysis, job market movements are measured as Occupation Population Variability (OPV) scores. Occupations with negative OPV scores have had a net loss of jobs across a given time period, in this case 2020-2024. Businesses should try to hire people in these negative-OPV occupations because they are more wary of being unemployed [(1)](https://link.springer.com/article/10.1186/s40173-016-0069-6) and, thus, more likely to do their job well for fear of being fired. Also, they are more likely to put more effort into their work and are more likely to accept a lower salary than they would in other circumstances [(2)](https://publications.aaahq.org/jmar/article-abstract/34/2/1/75/Do-Job-Candidates-Effort-Promises-Matter-When-the?redirectedFrom=fulltext). An unfavorable job market also leads employees to look past flaws in their workplace, to diminish flaws they identified in the past, and to focus on their workplace's strengths [(3)](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0749597815000795?via%3Dihub). These effects increase with the worsening of the job market [(2)](https://publications.aaahq.org/jmar/article-abstract/34/2/1/75/Do-Job-Candidates-Effort-Promises-Matter-When-the?redirectedFrom=fulltext). In other words, the more negative an occupation's OPV score is, the better.

According to the analysis, the job market has been worst for lawyers (OPV = -1.424), followed by sales occupations (-1.061), so businesses should hire from these occupations now. The other occupations analyzed (management, engineering, life/physical/social science, and production/transport) have positive OPV scores (0.676, 0.595, 0.993, and 0.221, respectively), so new hires from these occupations may have more bargaining power, increasing with their OPV score. This does not mean, though, that current employees in these OPV-positive occupations will be more likely to leave [(4)](https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1177/001872679905201001), so hiring for these positions can safely slow without risk of being unprepared for a loss of employees.

This analysis uses Excel and SQL to clean and analyze employment data from the Bureau of Labor Statistics's Current Population Survey. Cleaning the data involved using Excel to remove unnecessary rows and columns, rename rows and columns, correct missing data, and combine multiple data frames. OPV scores were created using SQL by taking the number of jobs added to or taken from the job market in each occupation for each year as a fraction of the total jobs in each occupation for each year, then averaging these across all four years and standardizing each score.
